Who can compare with justice? It creates life.
Whenever wickedness may cause trouble,  will not be idle!
Let the standard that raises itself protect it like the heavens.
That which bows down its neck in submission puts its breast forward in defiance.
He who has silver is happy, he who has grain feels comfortable, but he who has livestock cannot sleep.
He who has nothing cannot let go of anything. When he enters …… no one gives him …….
If bread is left over, the mongoose eats it. If I have bread left over, a stranger consumes it.
If bread is left over, the mongoose eats it. If I have bread left over, a stranger consumes it.
To be wealthy and demand more is an abomination to a god.
In the city with no dogs, the fox is boss.
When a trustworthy boat is …… sailing,  seeks out a trustworthy harbour for it.
A plant sweeter than a husband, a plant sweeter than a child: may    dwell in your house.
In the sky there is the raven; on the ground there is the mongoose; in the desert there is the lion; my husband, where shall I go?
Oh my sister, if there were no outdoor shrines, oh my mother, if there were no river, I would be dying of hunger.
Thus my mother and my little sister act toward me: …… am I so deficient in judgment, that I should offer my cheek?
She who says  "My expense" is her girl friend. An interfering neighbour is the one with whom she quarrels.
To be sick is all right, to be pregnant is painful; to be pregnant and sick is just too much.
Give! -- Don't give! Don't let his hand touch it!
The course of its rituals was changed. Its cults were annihilated.
Where there were ritual preparations, they were destroyed. You should not change the course of its rituals!
You should not destroy their cult! Where there were ritual preparations, you should not destroy them!
Let me tell you about my fate: it is a disgrace. Let me tell you of my condition: it makes a man's mouth taste bitter.
That which matches my tears hurts my heart alike. It is said that rushes …… in the house.
Moving about defeats poverty.
When liars enter by the city gate, in front of them there is a finger pointing at them, behind them there is a finger pointing at them.
You are a scribe and you don't know you own name? Shame on you!
A disgraced scribe becomes an incantation priest. A disgraced singer becomes a flute-player. A disgraced merchant becomes a con-man.
If a scribe knows only a single line but his handwriting is good, he is indeed a scribe!
If a singer knows only a single song but he performs the melismas well, he is indeed a singer!
If a singer knows only a single song but he performs the melismas well, he is indeed a singer!
If a singer knows only a single song but he performs the melismas well. A scribe whose hand can follow dictation: he is indeed a scribe !
How will a scribe who does not know Sumerian produce a translation?
A fox urinated into the .  "I am causing the spring flood to rise," he said.
He has not yet caught the fox, but he is making a neck-stock for it.
A stranger's ox eats grass while my own lies hungry.
Good is in the hands. Evil is also in the hands. Wickedness does not feed a storehouse with interest.
He who shaves his head gets more hair. And he who gathers the barley gains more and more grain.
The palace is a forest, and the king is a lion; like    he covers men with a huge battle-net.
…… genitals ……
The palace cannot avoid the waste land. A barge cannot avoid straw. A freeborn man cannot avoid corvée work.
The head of the  bird is the glory of the garden.
The head of the francolin is the glory of the fields.
The head of the frog is the glory of the …… well.
You grind with the pestle like a fearful slave girl.
A happy ear is a happy god.
splits the heavens, yet he does not split the waterskin.
My mouth, every month I fill you, my mouth.
My tongue, like a runaway ? donkey, does not turn back. My mouth, I give you hot soup: may you ……. From fish whose bones have been picked out, you, my mouth, …… you devour everything.
A man's god is a man's shepherd. The god will not desert him. A shepherd should not ……. A man's god provides him with something to eat and water to drink.
From the mouth …… from the mouth ……. Whatever comes from his mouth will not be put in his hand.
The horse, after throwing off his rider, said:  "Were my load to be like this forever, how weak I would become!"
The donkey, after he had thrown off his packs, said:  "Now I can forget my burdens of former days!"
A donkey was floating in the river, and a dog watching him from dry land said:  "My own dear father, where are you going? When you come near, I will shed my tears on behalf of you."
In a household of several grown-up young men, …… battle fray ……
"Run!" …… the king ……. Because of silver, because of gold, because of the money chest, because of the …… chest, I am finished!
Make the donkey sit like this! I am making it lift its shrivelled penis!
Using a donkey in place of a sheep will not allow you to recognise any omens.
The lion had caught a helpless goat:  "Let me go! I will give you my fellow ewe in return!"  "If I am to let you go, tell me your name!" The goat answered the lion:  "You do not know my name? '……' is my name!" When he came to the fold, he shouted:  "…… my ……." She answered him from the other side:  "……. As for sheep, none live here!"
A lion caught a wild boar. He roared:  "Your flesh has not yet filled my mouth, but your squeals have deafened my ears!"
O lion, your allies in the reedbeds are numerous.
In the reedbeds the lion does not eat his acquaintance.
A dog said to his master:  "If my pleasure is of no importance to you, then my loss should not be either!"
The dog does not let …… sit down in …… house.
The dog …….
The dog understands:  "Take it!" It does not understand:  "Put it down!"
The dog which …… sheep-fat --  "dog" is indeed its name.
A dog which is played with turns into a puppy.
He cried out like a rabid dog; its reward was having its skin flayed.
You behave like a rabid dog stretching into the river ?, guzzling water.
Don't start a fight with a dog. Will that dog not bite you?
When a dog snarls, throw a morsel into his mouth.
It is a dog's lot to collect bones.
A dog was going to a party. After he had seen the bones, he went away.  "Where I am going, I will be eating more than this," he said.
Biting the workmen like a whelping bitch.
Thus speaks the dog to the pups:  "You are mottled, you jump around -- you are my dear children."
A pig takes away as for himself, so for his owner.
Like a pig spattered with mud.
A pig picks up morsels of bread.
A goat is the gift of a large kid, the large kid which wears a beard.
A bear which for six months had not turned onto his side said:  "Were  not to bestow sleep on someone, as he does me, they would expire."
Like a hyena, he will not eat it unless it stinks.
A fox was laying down ? a threshing floor. It did not …… on the threshing floor, but the fox did not become exhausted.
The fox thought about his mother's interference and said:  "My …… is crushed."
The fox dropped her young. Her twins came out.
A fox …… to a goat ……. On the arrival …….  "If there's a dog staying on that account in your house, …… my shoes!"
A fox went under a thorny bush. Meanwhile a dog sat at the entrance:  "Come out to me!" but he would not come out:  "How can he get in from outside? -- Unless you chase me out, I will stay sitting here."
The fox set his mind on some treachery:  "I am throwing it out. I am carrying my city to the river."
Strength cannot keep pace with intelligence.
The wise one …… knowledgeable one ……. A fool who was overwhelmed by his backside stuck his hand up his backside.
Like a wild sheep up a poplar, he went up, he kept going up.
Don't give the halt man a club for his arm.  shall be the one to help him!
Don't give the halt man a club for his arm.  shall be the one to help him!
The quick one hid, the strong one fled; the voluble one succeeded in getting into the palace.
I, a slave girl, have no authority over my lady. Let me pull my husband's hair instead.
The slave girl has no authority over the lady:  "Let me pull my husband's hair instead."
The slave girls did not take out the  drum.  remained seated in the village ?.
The voluptuous slave girl says:  "Let , …… god …… great king …… split the fertile ground like a cucumber."
A judge who despises justice, cursing with the right hand, and the chasing away of a younger son from the house of his father are abominations to .
One city does not greet another, but one person greets another person.
…… wearing it, it is good, …….
…… a daughter-in-law …… the position of being my father-in-law …… bought by a wealthy man.
The  bird's voice is the glory of the gardens. The frog's voice is the glory of the marsh waters. The francolin's voice is the glory of the fields.
…… will be insulted …… bound by insults.
…… the gods are three. So it is said, so let it be!
…… mankind …… without ……
…… troubled …… strike his master.
a women weaver …….
…… not do …… equipment …… master …… submit …….
…… may he live. Their faces are sympathetic …….
The mighty man is master of the earth.
Let me tear out ……, it will not be achieved.
…… who will do it?
If bread is left over, the mongoose eats it. If I have bread left over, a stranger consumes it.
To be wealthy and demand more is an abomination to one's god.
Because he lives as though deaf, because of you, my son is not fit to be a scribe.
He who slanders …… for the liar --  will crush his head ……. His good deeds aim at evil. His looks are shameless. There are fingers pointing at him from behind. , the lord who loves justice, extirpates wickedness and prolongs righteousness. A heavy punishment …… slander ? befalls him.
…… ascends to heaven.  When battle approaches, when war arises, the plans of the gods, beloved by the gods, are destroyed. You cause fire to devour the Land. May my god know that my hand is suited to the stylus.
As for me, what did my god do?  the basket and my debt, no expenditures were made for him!
A wealthy man had accumulated a fortune.  "I am spending it for him." That said, it was dispersed. Afterwards he could not work out what went wrong. Things change. No one knows what will happen.
A child without sin was never born by his mother. The idea was never conceived that there was anyone who was not a sinner. Such a situation never existed.
For him who walks, the day lasts. For him who dances, the sun shines. For the hero whose strength is enormous, moonlight is given.
A man without a personal god does not procure much food, does not procure even a little food. Going down to the river, he does not catch any fish. Going down to a field, he does not catch any gazelle. In important matters he is unsuccessful. When running, he does not reach his goal. Yet were his god favourable toward him, anything he might name would be provided for him.
A man without a personal god does not procure much food, does not procure even a little food. Going to a river, he does not catch any fish. Going to a field, he does not catch any gazelle. He is unsuccessful in ritual preparations, he is unsuccessful in important matters. Yet were his god favourable toward him, anything he might name would be provided for him.
One should pay attention to an old man's words and one should reap the benefits.
A child should behave with modesty toward his mother. He should take the older generation into consideration.
No matter how much wisdom exerts itself ?, you, fool, achieve what you need.
A younger brother should honour an older brother. He should treat him with human dignity.
Should not intelligence, wisdom and understanding become perfect …… to the mouth …… mankind? At the place of testimony …… friendship ……  the slippery place …… the place of god …… let …… who knows what to say …… to the mouth.
One ferryman says to another ferryman:  "A …… cannot cross the river by himself."
A girl from  ……. Her lap …… a man. Her anus was …….  …… a gate …… head …….
A companion …… sleeping place.
A mouse fell down from the roof beams. A mongoose approached it:  "Is any part of you hurt?" The mouse replied:  "You needn't come near me. I am equal to any part of you."
his …… not draw a boat …… his bucket …… it is good.
Your …… were changed. Their plans were overturned, so their cult decreased. Brothers don't see their brothers. What harm did the hero do to your ways or to your heart?
A goose spoke as follows:  "…… seven times …… dwelling well, one of my feet in the middle of the night."
The poor man caused all kinds of trouble for the wealthy man.  …… skin disease lasts forever; …… forever; …… skin disease lasts forever.
He who has silver, he who has lapis lazuli, he who has oxen and he who has sheep wait at the gate of the man who has barley.
What is in mankind's mouth is as difficult to hide as a wall. The boy who grew up in your town …… on you -- don't let your mouth accuse him; don't slander him; don't encourage violent retaliation against yourself.
The little mouse spoke as follows to his mother:  "As I came out, nobody saw me." His mother answered him:  "Anyone who saw you will carry you off!"
Although I spoke, what did I gain? Although I spoke, what did it add? I covered up for myself, but what success did it bring me?
…… erection …… Sumerian …… forehead …… kneading dough ……
…… sunset …… basket …….
…… true heart …… single …….
A dog sitting in a garden, a dog …… growing …… a dog …… demon of heaven and earth.
A dog ……
Let the wolf eat. …… may it get eye disease. No matter how small the dog is, you will make it grow.
The …… bird …… malt on the town square …… got bigger.
Should someone clever not act cleverly, then I ……; man's intelligence comes from god.
For your  "Let me work" a bed has been ……. For a  "Let me bake! Let me bake!" the owner of the oven has come home.
He who can say  "Let him hurry, let him run, let him be strong, and he will carry it!" is a lucky man.
A man who does not value his god is thrown out in the desert; his body is not buried and his heir does not provide his ghost with drinking water through a libation pipe.
The axe belongs to the carpenter, the stone belongs to the smith, the good …… belongs to the brewer.
Because he always went, because he always ran,  "He carried away. He carried away!" is the name assigned to him. A fool.
A slave girl should not …… a slave girl. …… whatever ……
Pleasure is created. Sins are absolved. Life is rejuvenated.
…… born …… the deities carry torches.
Although I spoke, what did I gain? Although I spoke, what did it add? I covered up for myself, but what success did it bring me?
…… bird rejoices …… bird …… not …… its call …… bird …….
…… following it …… belongs to the palace.
O mule, do you know your sire, and do you know your mother?
Let the snake find its deep hole, the scorpion its crevice, and the hyena its exit.
The wolf circles around it, the lion just picks it up.
A francolin ? keeps changing, from the rushes to the rushes.
A francolin gave birth to fifty young. A rook tried to rise up, but could not move its wings.
Like a raven, when something is thrown in front of your mouth you watch your own shadow.
Let just men be born in good health, and let their lives last long.
The just man's life lasts long. Life is the gift awarded for it.
He who has silver, he who has lapis lazuli, he who has oxen and he who has sheep wait at the gate of the man who has barley.
The dog gives nothing towards the ferryboat, and yet it claps its hand for the ferryboat.
When the young scribe is absent, it is a bad thing. No rushes are torn up to make his bedding.
Brotherhood is founded on the words of a quarrel. At the witness box, friendship becomes known.
Because I was always walking, because I always ran,  "He carried away, he carried away!" is what they called me.
A home-born slave was treated with contempt, so he wept. He had chaff in his hands, so he bared his teeth in anger.
……  …… builds a house for her …….
A small mouse was caught by a man:  "I ? am fleeing from evil," it said.
If I insult, I am insulted. Even if I don't treat someone with contempt, I am still treated with contempt.
No matter how much wisdom exerts itself ?, the fool achieves what he needs.
By following craftiness, one learns how to be crafty. By following wisdom, one learns how to be wise.
Earth is greater than heaven. Who can destroy it?
A god's …… is founded on stone.
To the trustworthy man belongs a divine voice ?. The barge on the river and the chariot on the road come to him.
A woman …… womb ?:  "A figure is growing as tall as the grass."
A ghost who had died said:  "You shouldn't carry oil."
Like a sweet voice …….
One should not …… someone who ……; one should greet someone who says something.
Your outhouse is like your ……, like your canal, like your dykes. Of what importance is it to you as a scribe?
Value -- anything of mine that is hired.
The stupidest of all shameless men.
The overstuffed donkey must carry the straw on its neck.
Like a raven, you have your eyes on enormous quantities of malt.
A man without a god -- for a strong man it is no loss.
The expenses ? of those who neglect justice are numerous.
Adding an inheritance share to an inheritance share is an abomination to .
When …… answers ……, it is a good omen from heaven.
© Copyright 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 The ETCSL project, Faculty of Oriental Studies, University of OxfordUpdated 2006-12-19 by JE