

43 
 
[1]  
 
 
  
   
 
 
Qusay Al-Turkey
1
   Emad Shakir Ahmed 
1
Director of Mesopotamian culture centre- Western Australia 
Perth WA, Australia 
lu.galqusay68@gmail.com  
2
Department of History  
University of Salahaddeen / Erbil - Iraq 
    
 
Abstract 
The  natural  environment  in the  ancient  civilization  of  North  Mesopotamia  was  one  of  the  factors 
affecting the evolution of the beliefs and rituals of its population. The animals that accompanied ancient 
humans during the course of their lives in the periods of the Stone Ages have influenced humanity and 
gained our respect because of their contribution to an important symbiotic relationship. This relationship 
is all the more powerful since animals resemble humans in terms of biological characteristics such as 
organs, limbs, head, eyes, and the senses. It is well-known that the cave human and the first villagers 
co-existed with animals such as mountain goats, which lived on natural pastures in the coastal areas and 
semi-mountainous regions. But the relationship between humans and animals took on a special character 
after humanity’s transition from primitive life to the more civilized urban existence. Archaeological 
evidence suggests that it is possible and highly likely that the civilization of North Mesopotamia actively 
engaged  in  the  sanctification  of  distinctive  species  of  animals,  leading  to  the  emergence  of  religious 
rituals related to certain animals since the tenth millennium B.C. This paper aims at shedding light on 
the  oldest archaeological evidence  about the  human-animal relationship, showing the  most important 
animals sanctified by Mesopotamia in prehistoric times, and clarifying the nature of thought related to 
religious beliefs through the worship and veneration of animals. The focus of this research would be on 
Animal Graphics as a Magical Ritual where clarification would be given to the most important types of 
those man-made drawings, and in his belief, their presence with him is part of the religious rituals and 
practices. Additionally, stress would be given to the most important types of animals with a religious 
ritual dimension where a group of animals drawn or sculpted by humans in prehistoric times, of which 
dogs, snakes and birds would be illustrated. 
 
Keywords: Animals; archaeological; civilization; Mesopotamia; prehistoric; symbiotic.  
 
1. Introduction 
When  I began studying  archaeology in the 1980s,  I  came  across  a 1959  article by Earl 
Ubell, science editor of the New York Herald Tribune, which sparked my curiosity. The piece 
                                                 
1
   Corresponding author : Qusay Al-Turkey 
THE SYMBOLISM OF ANIMALS AND THEIR   
RELATIONSHIP TO HUMANS IN THE CIVILISATION OF   
KURDISTAN IRAQ/MESOPOTAMIA 
 
ISSN: 2716-9189                                                                                                    E-ISSN: 2676-1750                                   
Journal of Studies in Language, Culture, and Society(JSLCS).                    (05) 01, 2022. (PP. 43-52) 
Received:  16.02.2022                      Accepted:13.05.2022                          Published: 30.06.2022 
 

44 
 
was titled “New Horizons in Science, Another Look at Humans’ Earliest Animal Friends” and 
in it, Ubell explored the relationship between humans and animals. I have since considered this 
subject from many perspectives throughout my academic career and developed a theory about 
the  human-animal  relationship  which  connects  the  fields  of  archaeology,  social  theory  and 
epistemology: I am convinced that the environment in which the first humans lived alongside 
animals had a direct impact on the nature of ideas. 
The natural environment in the ancient civilization of North Mesopotamia was one of the 
factors  affecting  the  evolution  of  the  beliefs  and  rituals  of  its  population.  The  animals  that 
accompanied ancient humans during the course of their lives in the periods of the Stone Ages
2
( 
Briadwood  & Howe, 1960; Solecki, 1963; Steven, 2001; Kolinski, 2014)  (between the food 
gathering stage and the food producing stage) have influenced humanity and gained our respect 
because of their contribution to an important symbiotic relationship. This relationship is all the 
more  powerful  since  animals  resemble  humans  in  terms  of  biological  characteristics  such  as 
organs, limbs, heads, eyes, and senses (ريتشارد, 2000, p. 2). 
It is well-known that the cave humans and the first villagers co-existed with animals such 
as mountain goats, which lived on natural pastures in the coastal areas and semi-mountainous 
regions (Solecki,  1980,  p.  68).  But  the  relationship  between  humans  and  animals  took  on  a 
special  character  after humanity’s transition from primitive life to the more civilized urban 
existence.  Archaeological  evidence  suggests  that  it  is  possible  and  highly  likely  that  the 
civilization of North Mesopotamia actively engaged in the sanctification of distinctive species 
of  animals,  leading  to  the  emergence  of  religious  rituals  related  to  certain  animals  since  the 
tenth millennium B.C (Brock, 1980, p. 37). 
The  following  are  aspects  of  these  rituals  relating  to  human  belief  and  thought,  which 
connect  the  co-existence of  animals  and  humans  in  the  civilization  of  ancient  North 
Mesopotamia.(see map1) This investigation aims to answer the main idea: 
There is a great deal of civilizational contact with the past, so it is necessary to study this 
polemic civilizational past, through a methodical, open-minded study that places the focus of 
the thinking on  a  general question upon the archaeologists and  anthropologists seriously and 
systematically discussing its content. 
The question is whether we can explain the many strong similarities between the beliefs 
and  customs  of  different  races, and their connections  in  terms  of  belief  in  general,  about  the 
sanctification of some natural phenomena for symbols that may be of no origin to animals or 
inanimate objects, still affected the behaviour and thought of some groups of people, whether 
in the Arab countries or Western world and even in the belief of many peoples in Asia and India 
for example, Through reverence for the animal, optimism or fear of it, while we live in the era 
of modernity and scientific and technological development. 
 
                                                 
2
 It is well known that in the Stone Age periods in ancient Kurdistan region history is dating back between 
the Paleolithic: 35.000- 10.000 BC, and the Mesolithic (the subsequent period of the Paleolithic): 10.000- 8000 
BC, and the Neolithic period: 8000- 5600 B.C 

45 
 
 
Map1. Mesopotamia and neighbouring civilization, behave from: 
 Frederick Mario Fales and others, Signs before the Alphabet Journey to Mesopotamia 
at the origins of writing, Venice- Italy, 2017, p.207. 
 
2. Literature Review 
2.1 Animal Graphics as a Magical Ritual 
Archaeologists  and  specialists  in  ancient  paintings  believe  that  art  of  all  kinds 
accompanied religious beliefs as a necessary narrative vehicle that explained the journey of life. 
The collective life journey of human civilization began with living alongside non-domesticated 
animals,  especially  those  that  humans  drew  on  the  walls  of  the  caves  in  approximate  forms.       
Aspects  of  these  paintings  indicate that they served a religious or ritualistic purpose
5
. The 
instinctive motivation in humanity and our love of imitating things of a particular nature, such 
as beings that have  movements similar to our own, and  those that share common sensory 
perceptions and daily practices, is one of the things that led us to move toward art through the 
expression of shapes and reality, albeit complex and ambiguous
6
. A primitive human’s artistic 
production was limited to the embodiment of all that he saw in the environment surrounding 
him
7
, believing that he had accomplished something that would become a tangible reality after 
he had represented it graphically through painting. Thus, he made manifest what was occurring 
in his religious thoughts and beliefs. 
Equally  possible is the idea that the paintings of ancient humans may  be a kind of 
representation of the reality of the psychological preparation for real and practical actions, for 
example, the process of hunting. It was probably practised as a specific ritual before embarking 

46 
 
on certain activities such as  fishing or prior to important occasions. This means that the 
establishment of such rituals was intended to imagine the presence of the person fishing in an 
atmosphere similar to the actual fishing atmosphere, to facilitate the act of fishing. This ritual 
can be understood to support and rehearse the intended success of the person’s fishing 
endeavour and allay the fear of failure or threat from stronger animals. The hunters acted with 
the hand of a higher power, and they were probably the main proponents of the establishment 
of such rituals as an ideologically religious character
3 
 
2.2 Fishing Processes and Ritual Magic Paintings 
It is impossible to precisely determine the motivation behind creating animals on the walls 
of  caves,  but  evidence  suggests  that  these  paintings  reflect  the  patterns  of  thought  of  the 
civilization of North Mesopotamia during the Stone Ages. These people were trying to control 
the  natural  environment  around  them,  especially  the  animals  that  were  in  their  geographical 
environment, for food and ceremonial purposes. Ancient Northern Mesopotamians conjectured 
that the more the painting was identical to the original, the more successful the fishing process 
would be. If a human was dominant and able to make an accurate representation of his prey and 
have possession and omniscience over this symbolic image day and night, this may enable him 
to control the origin, purpose and practice of the hunt to achieve an economic goal sought by 
the human to obtain his food and build his strength. In this way, the process of fishing becomes 
a  spiritual  embodiment of humanity’s belief in its empowerment through channelling and 
controlling the feared and desired object. In addition, this process enabled human ‘believers’ to 
get  rid  of  some  dangerous  animals  and  prevent  evil.  In  this  way,  we  can  see  that  the  act of 
representation  was  not  merely  mimicry  of  material  objects,  but  rather  a  phenomenological 
embodiment of religious ideas and rituals
4
. 
One of the oldest frescoes in Northern Mesopotamia is a painted mural that dates back to 
the  era  of  Hassouna,  apparently painted  by  a  group  of  fishermen  in  Umm  al-Dabbaghia
5
, 
hunting Onagers
6
 for food
7
. The purpose of this painting is mainly to imbue the hunters’ skill 
with magical properties, as the painting expresses a magical force controlling the animals being 
hunted in the natural environment and contains ritual representations similar to those performed 
                                                 
3
  البياتي، عبد الحميد فاضل، هيئة المنحوتات البشرية المدورة في العراق القديم، اطروحة دكتوراه غير منشورة، جامعة بغداد،1997 ،
ص37 
4
 مثلات المشاهد الطقوسية على فخار العراق القديم، رسالة مقدمة إلى مجلس كلية ت -الطقوس في الفن العراقي القديم رزاق ، غفران  ،كاظم
الفنون الجميلة بجامعة بابل، 2012 . ص114 
5
 The site of Umm al-Dabbaghia  had population stability dating back to the era of Hassouna, located 27 
kilometers west of the city of “Al-hadhar”, within the slopes of Mount Sinjar. An area of the archaeological site 
100x85 m revealed several layers of housing, including rooms clad with a layer of plaster underneath the murals 
of scenes of hunting, in addition to the remnants of human settlement where the first layers of the site date back to 
the beginning of the sixth millennium BC. For more information, see: 
حجارة، اسماعيل حسين، أوائل العصر الحجري المعدني في شمال بلاد الرافدين (5800-8004 ق.م)، مجلة سومر، مجلد 52 ،
ج1و2،2003-0042 ص ،14 ؛ الدباغ، تقي والجادر، وليد، عصور قبل التاريخ، مصدر سابق، ص 140. 
6
 This animal is called a "donkey", a hybrid animal, half a donkey. The bones discovered in the site of "Um 
al-Dabbaghiyya" are the highest number of bones discovered in one location in the ancient east, which indicates 
that meat was the largest part of the diet of people living there. For more information about the mammalian mother, 
see: 
بوكوني، ساندر، البيئة الحيوانية لموقع ام الدباغية، تعريب: ميسون حبيب حسو، مجلة سومر، المجلد 30، لسنة 1974، ص 335-338 
7
 Diana K, Umm Dabbaghiyah, Fourth Preliminary 1974, IRAQ, Vol. XXXVII, 1975, Pl.II, a-b. 

47 
 
by the fishermen before engaging in the process of fishing, allowing them to feel superior to 
Terra and therefore able to catch the animal in reality. One of the animals at the top left of the 
scene is depicted as if being lifted by the hunter’s hook while leaving the rest to run fast
8
. This 
painting  is  a  ritualistic  assignation  of magical  power to  the  hunters’ skills.  Through  this 
imagined empowerment, the hunters convinced their visceral being that they would be able to 
catch one good specimen
9
. 
The  study  of  the  topics  of  artistic  paintings  in  ancient  Mesopotamia  during  prehistoric 
times  shows  that  these  paintings  are  related  to  religious  thought  and  belief,  although  a clear 
interpretation of the nature of these beliefs is still not fully resolved
10
. Human-made animal art 
allows researchers to gain significant insights into the available physical evidence, especially 
those forms and paintings carried out by humans on walls or pottery or stone tablets. Perhaps 
ancient human’s skill in painting animals is due to the proximity of these animals they were 
hunting, especially those animals that provided him with abundant and sufficient food such as 
donkeys and wild cows
11
. 
2.2.1 Animals as Friends of Humans 
After handling these animals, it was easy to examine and understand their shape, and this 
information was transferred into their understandings and beliefs
12
. In support of this idea, the 
Cave of Gunduk (about 70 km north-east of Nineveh) is carved into the city of Aqra (Akre), 
and it is described as "a rectangular scene (around 1x2 m)”. On the right side of the cave, a 
human is shown sitting in a long dress and wearing a crown with a goat beside him, its front 
hooves  on  his  lap, suggesting  subservience.  Behind  this  is  a  secondary  scene  of  a  human 
standing and beside him is a mother bear suckling a small bear (see Figure 2). The fact that a 
human is an old man supports the idea that domestication and interaction with animals occur 
through  close  and  consistent  symbiotic  relationships  built  over  time – the  old  man  has 
developed  this  relationship  and  now  as  the  domesticator  of  the  animals,  benefits  from  the 
service of the animals under his reign. In the secondary scene, the depiction of a mother bear 
and  her  cub  is  significant  because  these  are  fierce,  threatening  predators,  unlike  the  passive 
creatures of traditional domestication such as cows, goats, chickens and dogs. Archaeological 
evidence tells us that locals in this region tell legendary stories about the female bear’s special 
relationship with humans. This festive scene featuring a mother bear and  her cub is repeated 
frequently in the scenes of the civilization of North Mesopotamia in the words of Taha Baqer
13
. 
The  famous  archaeologist,  Seton  Lloyd,  has  traced  many  ancient  carved  scenes  to  the 
beginning of human knowledge of agriculture, referring specifically to the progress in the cave 
                                                 
8
 50ص ،2007صاحب، زهير، الفنون التشكيلية العراقية عصر ما قبل الكتابة، مطبعة دبي، بغداد،  
9
 Lloys, Seton and Others, Fifty Years of Mesopotamian Discovery, British School of Archaeology in Iraq, 
1982, p.20.  
 
10
 لف الثالث ق.م، ابراهيم، نعمان جمعة، تقديس الحيوانات في بلاد الرافدين، في ضوء المشاهد الفنية من الالف التاسع حتى نهاية الا
اطروحة دكتوراه غير منشورة مقدمة الى كلية الآداب بجامعة صلاح الدين/ اربيل، 2009 ص ،25. 
11
 Gorden V, New Light on the Most Ancient East, London, 1935, fig.9 
12
 البرواري، حسن احمد قاسم، رموز الآلهة في منحوتات منطقة بادينان- دراسة حضارية، رسالة ماجستير غير منشورة مقدمة الى مجلس 
كلية الآداب – قسم الاثار بجامعة صلاح الدين، 2002 ،ص 89. 
13
 باقر، طه وسفر، فؤاد، المرشد الى مواطن الاثار والحضارة، الرحلة الثالثة، مديرية الفنون والثقافة الشعبية، بغداد، 1965 ص ،45. 

48 
 
area of Gunduk
14
. We also know that the representation of animals connected with humans has 
been associated with the early periods of ritual, perhaps in this context taking a certain religious 
significance.  In  particular,  we know  that  archaeologists  have  visited  the  cave  and  found 
evidence  inside  a  small  temple  cave  on  the  Eastern  side
15
,  but  the  evidence  to  support  this 
interpretation is inconclusive.  
2.3 The Most Important Types of Animals with a Religious Ritual Dimension 
Although there are no explicit signs that tell us which animals are assigned degrees of 
purpose or importance in the paintings and carvings of animals in ancient North Mesopotamia, 
the data revealed by the material sources allow inference about the meanings and implications 
of the intellectual and religious significance of some animals
16
. 
Among the animals that are illustrated in the archaeological studies material, we find the 
following: 
2.3.1 Snake 
The  representation  of  the  snake  in  art  is  common  in  prehistoric  times,  and  among  the 
oldest of these are models drawn on the pottery from the era of the mid-fifth millennium (4500 
BC)
17
, where a piece of pottery was found from the site of Arpachiyah inscribed with a Cobra
18
 
, and another pottery fragment from the same period was seen at the site of Yarim Tepe, but the 
latter is painted in black
19
. 
According  to  specialists  of  the  legends  of Mesopotamia,  the  snake  is  a  symbol  of  the 
forces  born  in  the  earth,  since  early  times,  and  it  is  described  as  the  goddess  known  as  the 
"Mother  Land"
20
.  In  accordance  with  historical  understandings  and  ancient  Mesopotamian 
beliefs, snakes occupied the land that became known as the cradle of civilization and, in this 
way, became synonymous with birth and nurturing. The earth (from which the snakes emerge) 
supplies  humans  and  animals  with  food  through  germination.  Likewise,  the  snake  multiplies 
and nurtures her offspring.  In the shedding of skin, snakes also signify the cyclical nature of 
life. 
The excavation of these models confirms that the snake had an important role in the life 
of ancient humans and that the impact of the snake on the thought of the Mesopotamian human 
is related to worship, rituals and related religious ideas
21
26. 
So, the snake motif, which appears frequently in Mesopotamian and Ancient Near Eastern 
art  of  many  kinds,  can  be  seen  to  satisfy  a  consistent  social  need  for  symbols  which  offer 
narrative explanations of life’s journey. As discussed earlier, these early humans connected 
their lived experiences with a sense of higher power expressed as religious beliefs and rituals. 
                                                 
14
 Lloyd S, F S A, Gunduk forward, Sumer, 1948, vol.4, p.43. 
15
 - الامين، محمود، استكشافات اثرية جديدة في شمال العراق، مجلة سومر، عدد 4 ـ الجزء الثاني، لسنة 1948 ص ،207، شكل رقم 14 . 
16
 ابراهيم، نعمان جمعة، تقديس الحيوانات، مصدر سابق، ص 25 وما بعدها 
17
 Goff, Beatrice Laura, Symbols of Prehistoric Mesopotamia, London, Yale University, 1963, Fig.76,78. 
18
 Mallowan M and Rose J, Excavation At Tell Arpachiyah 1933, IRAQ, Vol. II, 1935, p. 164, fig.77, No.9. 
19
 Merpert  N  and  Humanchaev  M,  Yarim  Tepe  I  and  Yarim  Tepe  II  in  Northern  Iraq,  IRAQ, 
Vol.LXIX,1987, fig.21, N.4. 
20
 - Langdon S, in the Mythology of all Races, I, New York, 1964, p.90. 
21
 ابراهيم، نعمان جمعة، تقديس الحيوانات، مصدر سابق، ص 37. 

49 
 
2.3.2 Dog 
Among the other  animals to have appeared in physical  evidence  (i.e. bone) or artistic 
scenes, especially the sculptures and paintings of animals in prehistoric times, we find the dog. 
Dogs are perhaps among the oldest animals to have formed a relationship with humans, which 
is suggested by the fact that dog skeletons have been found buried within human settlements 
since  the  Middle  Stone  Age  and  within  the  waste  from  the  excavation  in  the  cave  of  Pale 
Gawra
22
. Clearly, dogs occupied a special place in the imagination of  ancient artists through 
paintings,  sculptures  and  the creation  of  miniature  likenesses.  In  the  village  of  Germo  in  the 
Neolithic Age, we found many different sized models of dogs which had been fashioned from 
mud and blood-coloured stone mixture
23
. In the Qalinj Agha hill in Erbil, we also found samples 
of  mud  dolls  of  dogs  from  the  era  of  the  mid-fifth  millennium  BC  (period  of Half)
24
.  At  the 
archaeological site, “Tepe Gawra”, we also found stone puppets of dogs and discovered a hole 
on the side of one shoulder
25
. It was likely to have been used as an amulet attached to clothing, 
especially for sick children. 
It  is  not  surprising  that  these  amulets  performed  a  function  with  religious  ritual 
dimensions. It has been established that the dog was described as an animal that treats its own 
wounds by licking them until they heal. The ancient symbolism of dogs can be connected to the 
healing goddess “Gula”, a clear reference to the dog's link in ancient Mesopotamian thought to 
healing diseases
26
. 
2.3.3 Birds 
Birds  were  among  the  animals  that  received  sanctity  and  status associated  with  the 
practice of some rituals, from the early settlement of humanity during the tenth millennium of 
the Middle Stone Age. This is supported by the discovery of the remains of the wings of birds, 
likely to be from falcons or cranes within the excavations in the village "Zawy Chemi" or the 
late layers of the “Shanider” cave. These wings had been buried in well-designed  graves, 
suggestive  of  human  intervention  in  the  burial  with  all  care  and  attention
27
.    In  addition,  we 
have found birds in the paintings covering pottery dishes from the era of the Halaf civilization 
of the mid-fifth millennium. Similarly, birds on pottery vessels were found at the " Tepe Gawra" 
site, clearly indicating the human interest in birds, not merely for the sake of decoratively filling 
in the blank spaces on wares, but more likely, these semantics concerned the practice of some 
kind of religious ritual
28
. 
Perhaps  the  same  purpose  was  in  the  imagination  of  the  farmers  from  the  village  of 
"Zawy Chemi", where they were interested in birds as bearing religious connotations
29
34. Other 
sources provide strong evidence of the sanctification of birds: Depictions focus especially on 
the unique wing silhouettes of cranes and hawks showing these birds flying high and humans 
                                                 
22
 Braidwood R and How B, op.cit, 1960, p.129. 
23
 Ibid, p.28. 
24
 Abu Al-Soof B, Excavation at Tell Qalinj Agha- Erbil, سوER, Vol. 25, 1969, p.9, Pl.XIII. 
25
 Tobler A, Excavation at Tepe Gawra, 2 Levels IX - XX IRAQ, Vol.101, 1950, p.179, fig.62. 
26
 لابات، رينيه، الطب البابلي والاشوري، سومر، مجلد 26، لسنة 1970، ص44. 
27
 Solecki R, Zawy Chemi Shanider A post – Pleistocene Village in Northern Iraq, 1964, p.405. 
28
 Goff, Beatrice Laura, op.cit, Fig.76,78. 
29
 الجادر، وليد، الانسان البدائي، مجلة الأكاديمي، العدد الاول، جامعة بغداد، 1971، ص23 

50 
 
shown far below. In ancient Mesopotamian thought, birds represented the wind as an important 
elemental force in agriculture. Ancient seals provide strong evidence of the belief that reverence 
for birds provided some protection for humans in agricultural settlements
30
 . 
Finally, it can be said that the works of art completed by humans during the stone Age 
over 10,000 years ago offer the most obvious evidence for understanding the nature of human 
belief.  Such  artworks  include  many  aspects  of  tradition,  customs  and  beliefs. Through 
experience, telling and retelling, these became entrenched within the society. The nature of the 
art of ancient humans is not in itself the object of tradition but the revelation of the intellectual 
systems  that  have  helped  humans  to  establish  certain  rituals  which  support  our  collective 
purposes
31
.  Humans  in  the  Mesopotamian  civilization  lived  in  closer  contact  with  nature, 
allowing for the development of a kind of harmony between human existence on the one hand 
and  animal  life  on  the  other.  Through  this  symbiosis,  certain  animals  became  objects  of 
meditation, often elevated as indirectly representing religious symbolic value
32
. 
3 Conclusion 
Ancient humans’ religious ideas developed in connection with their geographical and 
natural  environment  and  served  to fulfil essential  practical,  social  and  psychological  needs. 
Religious  beliefs  and  rituals  were  also  important  means  by  which  ancient  humans  sought  to 
minimize fear of the many natural hazards that threatened their stability and survival. In keeping 
with this idea, ancient humans achieved a high degree of social accord about the role of animals 
in their lives, which supported the structures of their civilization: They lived side by side with 
animals,  observed  and  understood  their  behavior,  domesticated  certain  animals  and  took 
advantage of their products. All this was possible because of a reflective and respectful attitude 
– ultimately reflected in the worship of animals as sacred beings.  
 
There  is  compelling  evidence  to  suggest  that  humans’  perception  of  animals was 
crystallized  by  close  observation  of  animal  existence;  a  process  often  serving  to  illustrate 
effective  survival  strategies.  Animals  played  a  significant  role  in  the  expansion  of  human 
perception  and,  as  the  archeological  and  anthropological  evidence  demonstrates,  they  were 
accordingly acknowledged as sacred symbols, elevating the struggle for survival to the realm 
of spirituality. 
In the end, we can say that the Archaeological and anthropological evidence available to 
researchers at some prehistoric times have proven that man has practiced an activity described 
as  magical  tending  to  what  is  known  recently  with  the  recent  science  as  Para-psychological 
during  the  early  ages  of  the  emergence  of  civilization  in  the  shadow  of  his  primitive  life. 
Additionally,  while  going  through  studying  the  evidence  about  magical  practices,  we  can 
investigate a number of these Phenomena and traces the continuation of their existence in our 
midst from distant yesterday to the present day. 
                                                 
30
 Frankfort H, Cylinder Seal, London, 1939, Pl.XI.m. 
31
  
 
مع ،يولادجم راد ،عمتجملاو نفلا يف تاسارد ،نورخآو ريهز ،بحاصان، الاردن، 2006، ص28 
32
 سيرنج، فيليب، الرموز في الفن -الاديان-الحياة، ترجمة عبد الهادي عباس، دار دمشق، سوريا ،1992، ص38 

51 
 
There is no doubt that recent scientific studies have added a lot of valuable information 
that has been provided by Anthropologists and sociologists. They, have tried to provide logical 
and scientific explanations for such magical and para-psychological practices, because ancient 
and modern humans cannot believe in practices that do not depend on logic, especially since 
sorcery and quackery cannot interfere with the most important human practices 
It goes without saying that specialists during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
classified  these  practices  among  the  peoples  of  the  ancient  history  in  north  Mesopotamia  as 
magical,  while  recent  studies  have  confirmed  that  they  are  among  the  parapsychological 
practices .This occurred especially since the roots of most of these practices have evidence for 
them in the customs, traditions and practices of the ancient East societies in the Northeast of 
the Mesopotamia  and in the ancient near east. 
References 
1- English References 
Abu Al-Soof B. (1969). Excavation at tell Qalinj Agha- Erbil. Sumer , 25, 3–42 
Diana, K. (1975). Umm Dabbaghiyah: Fourth preliminary 1974. IRAQ, 37(1), 3-10.  
Goff, B. L. (1963). Symbols of prehistoric Mesopotamia. Yale University 
Fales, M.  F.  et  al.  ,  F.  (2017). Signs  before  the alphabet  journey to  Mesopotamia  at  the 
origins of writing. Venice- Italy: Giunti Editor 
Langdon , S. (1964). In the mythology of all races, I. Cooper Square Publishers 
Frankfort H. (1939).  Cylinder Seal. London. 
Gorden, V. (1935). New  Light  on  the  Most  Ancient  East. London: Routledge  and  Kegan 
Paul Ltd  
Langdon S, in the Mythology of all Races, I, New York, 1964. 
Lloyd S, F S A, Gunduk forward, Sumer, 1948, vol.4. 
Curtis, J., & Lloyed, S. (1982). Fifty Years of Mesopotamian Discovery. British School of 
Archaeology in Iraq. 
Mallowan M. E. L., & J. Cruikshank Rose, J. (1935). Prehistoric Assyria: the excavations 
at Tell-Arpachiyah, 1933. Oxford University Press 
Merpert, N., & Munchaev, R. (1987). The Earliest Levels at Yarim Tepe I and Yarim Tepe 
II in Northern Iraq. Iraq, 49, 1-36. https://doi.org/10.2307/4200262 
Solecki, R. , & Rubin, M. (1958). Dating of Zawi Chemi, an Early Village Site at Shanidar, 
Northern Iraq. Science. 
Solecki , R. (1964). An Early Village Site at Zawi Chemi Shanidar. Undena Publications  
Tobler A, (1950). Excavation at Tepe Gawra, 2 Levels IX – XX. Philadelphia University of 
Pennsylvania Press . 
2- Arabic references:  
- ابراهيم، نعمان جمعة، تقديس الحيوانات في بلاد الرافدين، في ضوء المشاهد الفنية من الالف التاسع حتى نهاية 
الالف الثالث ق.م، اطروحة دكتوراه غير منشورة مقدمة الى كلية الآداب بجامعة صلاح الدين/ اربيل، 
2009. 

52 
 
- الامين، محمود، استكشافات اثرية جديدة في شمال العراق، مجلة سومر، عدد 4 ـ الجزء الثاني، لسنة 1948. 
- باقر، طه وسفر، فؤاد، المرشد الى مواطن الاثار والحضارة، الرحلة الثالثة، مديرية الفنون والثقافة الشعبية، 
بغداد، 1965. 
- البرواري، حسن احمد قاسم، رموز الآلهة في منحوتات منطقة بادينان- دراسة حضارية، رسالة ماجستير غير 
منشورة مقدمة الى مجلس كلية الآداب – قسم الاثار بجامعة صلاح الدين، 2002. 
- بوكوني، ساندر، البيئة الحيوانية لموقع ام الدباغية، تعريب: ميسون حبيب حسو، مجلة سومر، المجلد 30، لسنة 
1974. 
- البياتي، عبد الحميد فاضل، هيئة المنحوتات البشرية المدورة في العراق القديم، اطروحة دكتوراه غير منشورة، 
جامعة بغداد،1997. 
- الجادر، وليد، الانسان البدائي، مجلة الأكاديمي، العدد الاول، جامعة بغداد، 1971. 
- حجارة، اسماعيل حسين، أوائل العصر الحجري المعدني في شمال بلاد الرافدين (5800-4800 ق.م)، مجلة 
سومر، مجلد 52، ج1و2،2003-2004. 
- سيرنج، فيليب، الرموز في الفن -الاديان-الحياة، ترجمة عبد الهادي عباس، دار دمشق، سوريا ،1992. 
-  
 
مع ،يولادجم راد ،عمتجملاو نفلا يف تاسارد ،نورخآو ريهز ،بحاصان، الاردن، 2006. 
- صاحب، زهير، الفنون التشكيلية العراقية عصر ما قبل الكتابة، مطبعة دبي، بغداد، 2007. 
- كاظم ،غفران رزاق ، الطقوس في الفن العراقي القديم - تمثلات المشاهد الطقوسية على فخار العراق القديم، 
رسالة مقدمة إلى مجلس كلية الفنون الجميلة بجامعة بابل، 2012 . 
- لابات، رينيه، الطب البابلي والاشوري، سومر، مجلد 26، لسنة 1970. 
 